surprisingly or unsurprisingly the video
I made part of this one inspired some
discussion on a range of related topics
I think it is a new and somewhat
unsettling notion for many of you that
you and your diagnosis are one in the
same thing if you've been diagnosed with
dyslexia it's not that you're a person
who can read just as rapidly as everyone
else but you have dyslexia as something
separate and separable from who you are
and the conduct of your character no the
reality is you're a person who reads
poorly your person who has tremendous
trouble reading your person who needs
special education and special training
to be able to read at the same speed as
other people and some dyslexics never
catch up they never get out of the same
reading speed as other people they
struggle with it all their lives your
condition is not something other than
who you are the medical description of
your problem the medicalization of your
problems can be deceptive in precisely
this way and that's something that I
think haunts and directs and misdirects
people's lives to a massive extent in
our culture and what are the advantages
and disadvantages of this practical
philosophy I'm proposing to you one
person wrote in and said and I think he
was imagining he was confronting me with
a preposterous example he said well what
about brain damage would you really take
it that far are you really gonna tell me
that you are your brain damaged
pretty much everyone you know in 21st
century society has brain damage or one
kind of one kind or another from one
cause or another as life goes on its
merry way I can think of at least three
sources of brain damage that I have
suffered myself and as that list these
off you may request you may reflect that
these are true of you also or the two of
your parents or true of your teachers at
school or people you've known in your
own life I grew up in a neighborhood
lead poisoning in the drinking water my
father
did not care and I grew up in the days
when you bought concentrated orange
juice and a can you bought a frozen can
can the went in the freezer with the
orange juice in and you mixed it with
tap water but five parts to one I think
so every single day I was drinking
orange juice that was giving me some
subtle amount of lead poisoning what was
my father's attitude I remember talking
about it my father grew up in ultra
polluted steel industry town called
Hamilton so all the water he drank
growing up was polluted and the water
people swam in and Hambleton Harbor was
polluted and he turned out far fine and
he just fundamentally did not care and
during my lifetime the city government
had to dig up and replace all the pipes
the pipes had you know led soldering led
connections this kind of thing that was
the source of lead poisoning in my
neighborhood
you've probably heard some salacious
news stories just lately especially
about African Americans whatever reason
African American neighborhoods that had
lead poisoning and the sort of suspicion
that the federal government in states
didn't care or the local state
government didn't care
due to some implicit racism and this
kind of thing look one way or the other
lead poisoning is colorblind a lot of
the problems I've been reading about in
some of those newspaper stories lately
it is quite possible my behavioral
problems as a child or as a result of
lead poisoning and I have no idea to
what extent my brain development was
impaired about lead poisoning
number two concussion you've probably
heard vegan gains talk about the extent
to which he had serious concussions from
playing ice hockey don't know to what
extent had changed his character don't
know to what extent it created the
problems he complained so at this day
durianrider
another well-known vegan youtuber very
serious head and skull injury changed
his life he talked about that in the old
days and he's talked about it for a
couple years but whatever that's all
still up on the internet if you want to
know I had a bicycle accident as a child
kind of a medium sized child I would
guess maybe I was ten years old
something like that not not tiny but not
real big maybe I was eight or nine but
I really forget and you know didn't bump
into anything just smashed over hit my
head into the sidewalk and had all the
serious effects of concussion where you
had kind of memory lapses and you have
all these weird you know
visual effects where you're looking
around you're not really seeing seeing
strange colors and stuff you know I had
all these effects of a concussion never
know how it affected me maybe trivial
but absolutely by definition that kind
of injury causes brain damage in number
three
something I looked for scientific
peer-reviewed papers on years ago and
never really find any I read two
newspaper articles that the specific
drug I took to prevent malaria while I
did humanitarian work in northern Laos
causes permanent brain damage so it was
as an adult I took this malaria drug and
one of the newspaper articles I read
said there was a class-action lawsuit on
going because there was enough
scientific evidence when I was googling
around for it I never could find that
scientific evidence I only found
articles saying there were kind of
questions being raised and research
being done but the preponderance of
evidence I've seen indicates that I got
further brain damage from from
anti-malarial medication taken because I
did that humanitarian work and if you
think I says that malaria medication for
no reason at all the guy literally
sleeping in the room across the hall
from me in one of the remote stations
where I did where he got malaria or he
was at least diagnosed with and treated
with malaria
so they presumed he had it and they gave
him the medicine so you know the same
mosquito or the famous the mosquitos
cousin that bit him could have bit me I
was I was at risk of malaria I wasn't
taking that medicine for for no reason
at all so brain damage is real and it's
more widespread in 21st century society
than anyone wants to admit in a country
like Canada go ahead and look up what
percentage of us have impaired brain
function because our mothers drank
alcohol during pregnancy it is truly an
epidemic you try to estimate how many of
us have brained
just from binge drinking during own
lives from alcohol from marijuana yes
marijuana is scientifically proven to
cause brain damage that wants to fit it
but it is all the other habits in terms
of recreational drugs that people
participate in so willingly okay which
one sounds more like madness and which
one sounds more like sanity to you if I
tell you look this is who I am I'll
never know how that brain damage shaped
the development my character I'll never
know what capacities I might have had
that I don't have as a result what
talents I might have had it would have
you I have no idea in what ways that
might be better or theoretically might
be worse if I didn't have brain damage
those persons but this is Who I am
take it or leave it and with all my
advantages and disadvantages no one
other than me is responsible for my
conduct and I can't delete this injury
or this condition to then refer to what
remains when you delete that problem as
if that were the real me is if that were
who I truly am that were my true self
where people want to imagine is that
when your [ __ ] brother Timmy dies
and is reborn in heaven and you know
Christian heaven out of the Disney
movies that when you when you go to
heaven then he won't be [ __ ] anymore
that when dyslexics die and go to heaven
their real soul their true self shows up
in heaven without the dyslexia I guess
if you're color blind then you die and
go to heaven you can finally see color
skin okay so a widespread to some of you
what what's the implicit assumption
there in Western civilization the
implicit assumption is that you have a
soul and that soul somehow remains
undamaged and unchanged even by
impairments that you're born with like
you're born [ __ ] and yet some of the
real you is somewhere else without being
[ __ ] that there aren't going to be
[ __ ] people in heaven you know this
is it's a really deep-seated widespread
assumptions in our culture that a lot of
us even if you're a theist from
earth to some extent your your view of
the world is shaped by the sympathetic
so yeah it's powerful and disturbing and
necessary to face up to this and say no
this is me this is you this is all we've
got there is nobody else there is
nothing else especially not in terms of
responsibility for our own conduct you
know again a guy like vegan gains he's
talked about it publicly
he has behavioral problems he has
psychological problems he struggled with
things like hallucination he started
with a lot of very obvious symptoms put
it that way
symptoms that can be put on a checklist
he doesn't know to what extent you know
he was just born that way or to
understand it was the result of head and
skull injuries or in theory maybe even
an extreme reaction to some of the
medication he was put on for some of his
other health but we you don't know but
who now is responsible for him for his
moods for his conduct for his behavior
as an adult nobody it's on him one of my
half-brothers struggled with dyslexia
all his life to mine she's still
struggling
he was guy who was born with some
talents and not others you know I
totally understand the extent to which
dyslexia is a massive impairment you
know if you just look at why did he turn
out the way he turned out I turned out
the way I turned out one of the huge
fundamental differences was he was born
with dyslexia and I wasn't right and
everything about my character the focus
on reading and writing I'm very much a
visual learner and amount of time I
spent learning and learning various
languages and even learning that way in
English huge huge difference okay but
guess what
you know he was a man I'd take him I
can't I can't quote Shakespeare from
memory that way you know his dyslexia is
not something other than who he is sure
these conditions the empty's impairments
shape the development of who we are they
shape you
or assumptions and the choices we make
and which choices would be difficult and
which choices would be easy I met a new
one man who was severely dyslexic
he described the types of symptoms he
had in terms of not being able to tell
up from down left from right he had huge
huge problems at dyslexia and like a lot
of people with that condition as a young
man as a child he would cheat on his
tests and exams to stay in school and
you know he made a decision that he was
really gonna sit down and do the work
and overcome the disadvantage and he did
and eventually he got a PhD in in
English literature and I think he did
that PhD just to prove himself that he
could do it he was he was over 40 years
old when he got that PhD it wasn't some
simple it wasn't to get ahead it wasn't
for his career now he probably could not
have done that work he probably couldn't
have got that PhD at age 25 but he did
the work he set himself the task and he
did it by age 40 guys these are only the
disadvantages that are the easiest the
most palpable for us to discuss brain
damage dyslexia you know what's really
hard to discuss the way in which our
whole perception of the world our brains
our minds our character are shaped by
our first language I will never see the
world the way someone who speaks Chinese
is their first language will doesn't
matter how hard I work on learning
Chinese is my second language I can
never see the world the way someone who
speaks Cree or a Jib way or Cambodian or
lotion speaks the world as their first
language
okay the language we speak shapes the
development of our character it shapes
our assumptions about what's reasonable
and what's unreasonable it shapes the
development of our emotions and the
expression of our emotions even in our
dreams even when we even when we sleep
our ideas about
marriage and romantic love and so many
things sure they're shaped by religion
and culture you can talk in these
abstractions but in a very very real
sense if you have some experience
studying with different languages so
much of that is bound up in language and
for me someone who studied different
languages and different cultures
that's very palpable it's something I'm
really maybe maybe more aware of and
some of you in the audience but I know I
have some people models who speak 3 and
4 languages some of you will be will be
keenly aware of that as well and thus
the way our political biases and our
values what we think is valuable and
worthwhile to do with our time what
matter is what's visible and invisible
its shaped by the place you were born
the culture you were raised in the
language you speak what's thinkable and
unthinkable for all of those things that
may indeed shape the conduct of your
character that may make you an [ __ ]
or may make you very patient and
steadfast that may make you very
forgiving or may make you very demanding
and irascible all of these things may
shape it right but they can never be
medicalised you can never be diagnosed
with them the way you can be diagnosed
with brain damage or dyslexia you can
never use them as an excuse and it's the
suit it's the excuse making mentality
ultimately that is so dangerous and that
I'm trying to warn you guys against in
these videos